## I2C Protocol

I2C is a widely used 2-wire synchronous serial communication protocol. It is commonly used to interface a microcontroller to all sorts of sensors and ICs, including other microcontrollers. Since it uses 2-wire, the I2C protocol is also known as the Two-Wire Interface (TWI).

As the name suggests, it is aimed for interconnection over short distances and generally within a device's PCB. All Nordic SoC's come with at least one I2C controller that can operate in two roles: as a "controller" that initiates transactions and controls the clock, or as a "target" that responds to transaction commands.

Most I2C controllers on Nordic's chips support multiple speeds: 100 (`I2C_BITRATE_STANDARD`), 400 (`I2C_BITRATE_FAST`) and 1000 (`I2C_BITRATE_FAST_PLUS`) kbps. The default speed is 100 kbps.

The two I2C wires are called serial clock (`SCL`) and serial data (`SDA`). All devices on the bus are connected to these two lines.

The `SCL` is generated by the I2C controller sync all devices on the bus to one clock, while the `SDA` line is bidirectional, so data can travel in either direction (from controller to target or target to controller).

Each I2C target device has a unique address that distinguishes it from the other I2C target devices on the same bus. The address is usually a `7-bit` value, however, some I2C target devices also use a `10-bit` value.

## I2C Driver

To learn how to set up I2C in nRF Connect SDK, we will focus on the `I2C controller API`.

### Enabling driver

1.  Enable the I2C driver by adding the following line into the application configuration file `prj.conf`.
    ```kconfig
    CONFIG_I2C=y
    ```
2.  Include the header file of the I2C API in your source code file.
    ```c
    #include <zephyr/drivers/i2c.h>
    ```

### Initializing the device

Just like the GPIO driver covered in lesson 2, the generic I2C driver in Zephyr has an API-specific struct `i2c_dt_spec`, with the following signature:

This structure contains the device pointer for the I2C bus `const struct device *bus` and the target address `uint16_t addr`.

To retrieve this structure, we need to use the API-specific function `I2C_DT_SPEC_GET()`, which has the following signature:

3.  Specify which I2C controller your device (sensor) is connected to and its I2C address.

    If the sensor is not already defined in the board's `devicetree`, you need to manually add your sensor as a child devicetree node to the i2c controller, using a `devicetree overlay file`.

    > **Important**
    > This step depends on whether the I2C target device is already defined in your board's files or not. In the case of the Thingy:91 and Thingy:91 X, the sensors are already defined as child nodes of their I2C controller. See for example the devicetree file of the Thingy:91, available in `<install_path>/nrf/boards/nordic/thingy91/thingy91_nrf9160_common.dts`. The `BME680` and `BH1749` sensors are already added as child nodes in the `i2c2-controller` they are connected to.

    3.1 Create overlay files.
    As we learned in Lesson 3, from the details view, expand `Config files->Devicetree` and create an overlay file.

    This will create an empty overlay file in your application root directory.

    You can also create your overlay files manually. The files must end with the `.overlay` extension, and the name should match the board target of your device. It's recommended to store your overlay files in a dedicated subfolder called `boards` in your application folder. However, saving them in the root directory of your application is also acceptable.

    For example, if your board target is `nrf52840dk/nrf52840`, the corresponding overlay should be named `nrf52840dk_nrf52840.overlay`. Basically `/` is substituted with `_`.

    3.2 In the overlay file, specify the I2C controller that your sensor is connected to and its address.

    Depending on the Nordic chip used, there can be more than one I2C controller, so make sure to select the controller that is connected to your sensor.

    This can be confirmed by checking the schematic of your board or development kit to locate the pins connected to `SDA` and `SCL`. We will examine this in the exercise section of this lesson. You can use the DeviceTree viewer in VS Code to display the devicetree nodes for the available I2C controllers, which will tell you which pins are used by the controller.

    In the below illustration, we are assuming that the sensor is connected to the `i2c0` controller and it has the target address `0x4a` (from the sensor datasheet), and we are labeling it `mysensor`.

    At a minimum, you need to specify the `compatible`, the address of the i2c target device (`reg`), and its `label`.
    ```devicetree
    &i2c0 {
        mysensor: mysensor@4a{
            compatible = "i2c-device";
            reg = < 0x4a >;
            label = "MYSENSOR";
        };
    };
    ```
    > **Note**: for the `compatible` member you could specify the driver for the sensor if one exists in the SDK. However, the focus of this lesson is on raw I2C transactions.

4.  Define the node identifier

    The line below uses the devicetree macro `DT_NODELABEL()` to get the node identifier symbol `I2C0_NODE`, which will represent the I2C hardware controller `i2c0`.
    ```c
    #define I2C0_NODE DT_NODELABEL(mysensor)
    ```
    `I2C0_NODE` contains information about the pins used for `SDA` and `SCL`, a memory map of the I2C controller, the default I2C frequency, and the address of the target device.

5.  Retrieve the API-specific device structure.

    The macro call `I2C_DT_SPEC_GET()` returns the structure `i2c_dt_spec`, which contains the device pointer for the `I2C bus`, as well as the `target address`.
    ```c
    static const struct i2c_dt_spec dev_i2c = I2C_DT_SPEC_GET(I2C0_NODE);
    ```
6.  Use `device_is_ready()` to verify that the device is ready to use.
    ```c
    if (!device_is_ready(dev_i2c.bus)) {
        printk("I2C bus %s is not ready!\n\r",dev_i2c.bus->name);
        return; // Or return an error code
    }
    ```
    We now have a device struct `i2c_dt_spec *dev_i2c` that we can pass to the I2C generic API interface to perform read/write operations.

### I2C Write

The simplest way to write to a target device is through the function `i2c_write_dt()`, which has the following signature:

For example, the following code snippet writes 2 bytes to an I2C target device.

Specifically, we are writing the value `0x8C` to the internal register `0x03` on the I2C device.
```c
uint8_t config[2] = {0x03,0x8C};
ret = i2c_write_dt(&dev_i2c, config, sizeof(config));
if(ret != 0){
    printk("Failed to write to I2C device address %x at reg. %x \n\r", dev_i2c.addr,config[0]);
}
```

### I2C Read

The simplest way to read from an I2C target device is through the function `i2c_read_dt()`, which has the following signature:

This function requires that you first call `i2c_write_dt()` to the internal register you want to read from.

For example, the following code snippet reads `1 byte` from the internal register `0x03` from the I2C target device, assuming we called the previous write-code snippet prior to calling this one.
```c
uint8_t data;
ret = i2c_read_dt(&dev_i2c, &data, sizeof(data));
if(ret != 0){
    printk("Failed to read from I2C device address %x at Reg. %x \n\r", dev_i2c.addr,config[0]); // Assuming 'config' is still in scope
}
```
Alternatively, you can use `i2c_reg_read_byte_dt()` which combines the register address write and data read into one function call. This function is ideal for straightforward reads of a single byte from a device.

Another way to read from an I2C device is by using the `i2c_burst_read_dt()` function. This function reads data from multiple registers sequentially. It has the following signature:

For example, the following code snippet reads data from `3 registers/6 bytes` starting from the 1st byte of the register pointed to by the address `BH1749_RED_DATA_LSB`.
```c
uint8_t rgb_value[6]= {0};
//Do a burst read of 6 bytes as each color channel is 2 bytes
ret = i2c_burst_read_dt(&dev_i2c, BH1749_RED_DATA_LSB,rgb_value,sizeof(rgb_value));
// Check 'ret' for errors
```
This function is used and explained in more detail in exercise 2 of this lesson.

### I2C Write/Read

With I2C devices, it is very common to perform a write and a read data back to back by using the function `i2c_write_read_dt()`, which has the following signature:

A common scenario for this is to first write the address of an internal register to be read, then directly follow with a read to get the content of that register. We will demonstrate this in more detail in the exercise section of this lesson.

For example, the following code snippet writes the value `sensor_regs[0] = 0x02` to the I2C device at the address `0x4A` and then reads `1 byte` from that same device and saves it in the variable `temp_reading[0]`.
```c
uint8_t sensor_regs[2] ={0x02,0x00};
uint8_t temp_reading[2]= {0};
int ret = i2c_write_read_dt(&dev_i2c,&sensor_regs[0],1,&temp_reading[0],1);
if(ret != 0){
    printk("Failed to write/read I2C device address %x at Reg. %x \n\r", dev_i2c.addr,sensor_regs[0]);
}
```

---

## Exercise 1

### Connecting an BME280 temperature sensor

In this exercise, we will use a `BME280` Sensor hosted on a `Waveshare 1523` board to provide temperature readings. We chose a breakout board that supports `I2C` and `SPI` communication protocols to use the sensor in multiple lessons.

The `Waveshare 1523` board can easily be attached to any of our development kits through one of the available pin header connectors. The sensor board should be connected to the DK board (`nRF5340 DK` in this case) using the `P1` connector. Pin `P1.02` will be configured as `SCL`, and `P1.03` as `SDA`. `VDDIO` and `GND` should be connected as `VCC` and `GND` to the sensor board.

The `BME280` sensor offers three sensor modes: sleep mode, forced mode, and normal mode. After powering up the sensor, it will go into sleep mode by default. We should configure the sensor to go to normal or forced mode after powering up. That is to say, we need to configure the sensor's mode bits before reading the values.

The entire communication with the `BME280` is performed by reading and writing to registers that are `8-bit` wide.

Some registers are reserved and should not be changed. The calibration data is `read-only`, as these values are fixed at the time of production. Control registers are `read-write` capable and are used to control the settings. Data registers are the values returned or stored by the sensor after performing the sensing operation and, hence, are `read-only`. Status and chip-id are also `read-only`, while reset is `write-only`.

Data registers provide a 20-bit pressure value, a 20-bit temperature value, and a 16-bit humidity value. As all registers are `8-bit` wide, we will perform a multiple-byte read operation and then construct the value by putting bits/bytes at their proper locations. To read out the data values after conversion, it is recommended to use a `burst mode` and not address every register individually. Data readout is done by starting a burst read from `0xF7` to `0xFC` (for temperature and pressure) or from `0xF7` to `0xFE` (for temperature, pressure, and humidity).

The data is read out in an unsigned `20-bit` format both for temperature and pressure and an unsigned `16-bit` format for humidity. These readout values represent the uncompensated measurements. The actual temperature, pressure, and humidity values are then calculated using the compensation parameters. These compensation parameters are stored in the `non-volatile memory` of the device at the time of production. The register address, the content, and the datatype for these compensation parameters are shown in the table below (table description from original, table not included here).

### Exercise steps

1.  In the GitHub repository for this course, open the base code for this exercise, found in `l6/l6_e1` whichever version directory you are using (v3.0.0 and above).

2.  Let's enable the `I2C` driver by adding the following line to the application configuration file `prj.conf`.
    ```kconfig
    CONFIG_I2C=y
    ```
    > **Important**
    > If you are building with `TF-M` (e.g.: `nrf5340dk/nrf5340/cpuapp/ns`, `nrf9160dk/nrf9160/ns`, etc), you will need to disable logging for TF-M. The `UART` peripheral used for TF-M shares the same base address as the `TWIM` peripheral used in this exercise, and it's enabled by default in `nRF Connect SDK 2.6.0` and above. To disable it, simply add these two `Kconfig` symbols in `prj.conf`.
    > ```kconfig
    > CONFIG_TFM_SECURE_UART=n
    > CONFIG_TFM_LOG_LEVEL_SILENCE=y
    > ```

3.  In `main.c`, include the header file of the `I2C API`.
    ```c
    #include <zephyr/drivers/i2c.h>
    ```
4.  To display the sensor readings on the console, we will use a simple `printk()`.

    4.1 Include the header file `<sys/printk.h>` to use `printk()`.
    ```c
    #include <zephyr/sys/printk.h>
    ```
    4.2 Add the following configuration option to `prj.conf` to enable support for `floating-point` format specifiers, so we can print the temperature readings as floats. The reason why this option is not enabled by default is to save memory space, as enabling this option would increase code size by at least 1Kbytes.
    ```kconfig
    CONFIG_CBPRINTF_FP_SUPPORT=y
    ```

5.  #### Devicetree preparations

    5.1 Create a folder called `boards` and place it in this exercise's directory.

    5.2 Add an `overlay file` for the board

    Since the sensor is external to the board, we must add an `overlay file` to specify this external sensor is a child to which `i2c node` and specify the sensor's address. We also need to enable the `i2c node` and configure the pins.

    Create an overlay file, named in `[board]_[soc].overlay` form (For the `nRF5340 DK`, it will be `nrf5340dk_nrf5340_cpuapp.overlay`) and add the following code in the overlay file. How we got it `0x77` is explained in step 5.3.

    > **Note**: The following overlay content is specifically for the `nRF5340 DK`. If you are using a different development kit, you'll need to use the appropriate overlay content for your specific board target and name the overlay file accordingly.

    ```devicetree
    /* Overlay for nRF5340 DK with BME280 on I2C1 */
    &i2c1 {
        status = "okay";
        pinctrl-0 = <&i2c1_default>;
        pinctrl-1 = <&i2c1_sleep>;
        pinctrl-names = "default", "sleep";
        mysensor: mysensor@77{
            compatible = "i2c-device";
            status = "okay";
            reg = < 0x77 >;
        };
    };

    &pinctrl {
        /omit-if-no-ref/ i2c1_default: i2c1_default {
            group1  {
                psels = <NRF_PSEL(TWIM_SCL, 1, 2)>,
                        <NRF_PSEL(TWIM_SDA, 1, 3)>;
            };
        };

        /omit-if-no-ref/ i2c1_sleep: i2c1_sleep {
            group1  {
                psels = <NRF_PSEL(TWIM_SCL, 1, 2)>,
                        <NRF_PSEL(TWIM_SDA, 1, 3)>;
                low-power-enable;
            };
        };
    };
    ```
    > **Note**: When adding an overlay file to an application, a pristine build must be run before flashing. A warning in VS Code will pop up asking if you want to run the pristine build now.
    >
    > **Note**: In nRF Connect SDK v3.0.0 and above, Sysbuild is the default build system for multi-image builds. If you encounter build issues related to multi-image configurations, ensure Sysbuild is properly configured in your project.

    5.3 The `7-bit` device address is `111011x`. The `6 MSB` bits are fixed. The last bit is changeable by `SDO` value (see `bme280 datasheet`) and can be changed during operation. Connecting `SDO` to `GND` results in slave address `1110110 (0x76)`; connection it to `VDD/VDDIO` results in slave address `1110111 (0x77)`, which is the same as `BMP280`'s `I2C` address.

    The `SDO Pin` is represented by `ADDR/MISO` on the `Waveshare 1523` board. This pin is pulled up, so if the connection is unchanged, the SDO in the BME280 will remain high, giving a `0x77` address.

    Some sensor vendors offer 8-bit addresses that include the read/write bit. To identify this, they usually provide separate addresses for writing and reading. In such cases, only the top seven bits of the address should be used.

6.  Get the sensor's `node identifier`. This was explained in detail in step 4 of the I2C Driver section.
    ```c
    #define I2C_NODE DT_NODELABEL(mysensor)
    ```
7.  Retrieve the `API-specific device structure` and make sure that the device is ready to use:
    ```c
    static const struct i2c_dt_spec dev_i2c = I2C_DT_SPEC_GET(I2C_NODE);
    if (!device_is_ready(dev_i2c.bus)) {
        printk("I2C bus %s is not ready!\n\r",dev_i2c.bus->name);
        return -1; // Return an error code
    }
    ```
    With this, we have the pointer to the device structure of the `I2C controller` and the `sensor address` (target device address) and can start using the I2C driver API to configure the sensor connected to the I2C controller.

8.  Define the addresses of the relevant registers (from the sensor `datasheet`). Typically this information goes into a separate header file (`.h`). However, for the sake of keeping this demonstration simple, we will add them in `main.c`.
    ```c
    #define CTRLMEAS 0xF4
    #define CALIB00  0x88
    #define ID       0xD0
    #define TEMPMSB  0xFA
    #define CHIP_ID  0x60 // Define BME280 Chip ID (example value)
    ```
9.  We verify that we have properly connected the sensor by reading the `chip ID`. When the value is correct (see `bme280 datasheet`), we know that the sensor is working properly, and we can take the next step – Read Calibration registers.
    ```c
    uint8_t id = 0;
    uint8_t regs[] = {ID};

    int ret = i2c_write_read_dt(&dev_i2c, regs, 1, &id, 1);

    if (ret != 0) {
        printk("Failed to read register %x \n", regs[0]);
        return -1;
    }

    if (id != CHIP_ID) { // Use the defined CHIP_ID
        printk("Invalid chip id! %x (expected %x)\n", id, CHIP_ID);
        return -1;
    }
    ```
10. Read `Calibration Registers`. Most of the compensation parameters are `2-byte` values. In this case, we read temperature compensation parameter registers (2B each) in `burst mode`.

    Temperature compensation parameters begin from `0x88` address and contain 3 following registers.
    ```c
    uint8_t values[6];
    // struct bme280_data bmedata; // Assuming a struct exists to hold calibration data
    // struct bme280_data *sensor_data_ptr = &bmedata; // Assuming pointer is initialized

    // Note: The original text used 'spec', assuming it meant 'dev_i2c'
    int ret = i2c_burst_read_dt(&dev_i2c, CALIB00, values, 6);

    if (ret != 0) {
        printk("Failed to read register %x \n", CALIB00);
        return -1; // Return an error code
    }
    ```
    After reading from register locations, we will put bits/bytes in their proper locations to form compensation parameter values.
    ```c
    // Assuming sensor_data_ptr points to a valid struct bme280_data instance
    sensor_data_ptr->dig_t1 = ((uint16_t)values[1]) << 8 | values[0];
    sensor_data_ptr->dig_t2 = ((uint16_t)values[3]) << 8 | values[2];
    sensor_data_ptr->dig_t3 = ((uint16_t)values[5]) << 8 | values[4];
    ```
    These compensation parameters will be used by the compensation routines along with uncompensated environmental readings to make the correct / compensated outputs. Compensation formulas and routines are provided in the `datasheet`. Refer to the `datasheet` for more information. We use those routines as is with small modifications (in the prototype and variable datatypes).

11. Now we need to configure the sensor by writing to the `configuration register`. As per the `datasheet`, we have to put register into active/normal mode by setting `MODE` bits to `b'11`. And to set the `oversampling` parameters to `b'100` (i.e. 8x oversampling), we have to write `0x93` to the `CTRLMEAS` register. These registers are defined at the top of the `main.c`.
    ```c
    #define SENSOR_CONFIG_VALUE 0x93 // Example configuration value

    uint8_t sensor_config[] = {CTRLMEAS, SENSOR_CONFIG_VALUE};

    ret = i2c_write_dt(&dev_i2c, sensor_config, 2);

    if (ret != 0) {
        printk("Failed to write register %x \n", sensor_config[0]);
        return -1;
    }
    ```
12. In order to get temperature sensor data, we need to read `3 following registers` starting from `TEMPMSB`.
    ```c
    // Assuming SLEEP_TIME_MS is defined elsewhere (e.g., #define SLEEP_TIME_MS 1000)
    while (1) { // Example loop
        uint8_t temp_val[3] = {0};

        int ret = i2c_burst_read_dt(&dev_i2c, TEMPMSB, temp_val, 3);

        if (ret != 0) {
            printk("Failed to read register %x \n", TEMPMSB);
            k_msleep(SLEEP_TIME_MS);
            continue;
        }
    ```
    12.1. We need to put data from registers into valid order and combine them into 20-bit temperature signed value (uncompensated).
        ```c
        int32_t adc_temp =
            (temp_val[0] << 12) | (temp_val[1] << 4) | ((temp_val[2] >> 4) & 0x0F);
        ```
    12.2 Next, we can use parameters we previously stored to `compensate temperature value`.
        ```c
        // Assuming bme280_compensate_temp function and bmedata struct (holding calibration data) are defined
        int32_t comp_temp = bme280_compensate_temp(&bmedata, adc_temp);
        ```
    12.3 The next step to do is to convert them to `Celsius` and `Fahrenheit`.
        ```c
        float temperature = (float)comp_temp / 100.0f;
        double fTemp = (double)temperature * 1.8 + 32;

        // Print reading to console
        printk("Temperature in Celsius : %8.2f C\n", (double)temperature);
        printk("Temperature in Fahrenheit : %.2f F\n", fTemp);

        k_msleep(SLEEP_TIME_MS); // Delay in loop
    } // End of example loop
    ```

13. Connect the sensor board to your `DK` using jumper cables (Connections for `nRF5340 DK` shown):

    | Wire color | Sensor board | nRF5340 DK       |
    | :--------- | :----------- | :--------------- |
    | Red        | VCC          | VDDIO by Port P1 |
    | Black      | GND          | GND by Port P1   |
    | Blue       | SDA          | Port P1.03       |
    | Yellow     | SCL          | Port P1.02       |

14. Build the application and flash it on your development kit.

    Using a `serial terminal`, you should see the below output:
    ```console
    *** Booting nRF Connect SDK v3.0.0 ***
    *** Using Zephyr OS v3.7.99 ***
    Temperature in Celsius : 26.37 C
    Temperature in Fahrenheit : 79.47 F
    Temperature in Celsius : 26.37 C
    Temperature in Fahrenheit : 79.47 F
    Temperature in Celsius : 26.37 C
    Temperature in Fahrenheit : 79.47 F
    Temperature in Celsius : 26.37 C
    Temperature in Fahrenheit : 79.36 F
    Temperature in Celsius : 26.37 C
    Temperature in Fahrenheit : 79.36 F
    ```
    Try blowing on the sensor, and notice an immediate change in the readings.

    The solution for this exercise can be found in the GitHub repository, `l6/l6_e1_sol` of whichever version directory you are using (v3.0.0 and above).

---

## Exercise 2

### Connecting to the BH1749 Ambient Light Sensor on the Thingy:91 and Thingy:53

> **Note**: This exercise does not work on the `Thingy:91 X`, as it does not have the `BH1749` Ambient Light Sensor.

Instead of the usual development kits, we have used to run samples and exercises throughout this course, this exercise uses a special type of Nordic Semiconductors' prototyping boards called the `Thingy`. This exercise can be run on either a `Thingy:53` or a `Thingy:91`.

The `Thingy` is an easy-to-use battery-operated prototyping board that allows the user to build a proof-of-concept in minimal time as it contains onboard a variety of sensors and interfaces. For this exercise, to illustrate how to use the `I2C` interface, we will be using either the `Thingy:53` or the `Thingy:91` and make use of the `BH1749: Ambient Light Sensor` they have onboard.

The `BH1749NUC` is a color sensor which uses `I2C` for its interface. The Integrated Circuit (IC) onboard the sensor senses `Red, Green, Blue (RGB)`, and `infrared` colors, then represents their intensities as digital values stored in 2 bytes for each value.

In this exercise, we will read the `RGB` value from the sensor and print it on a `serial terminal`.

The table below (description from original, table not included here) shows the registers of the color sensor and their corresponding addresses. For our exercise, the relevant registers are the 4 registers in the red box. The 4 registers are, the basic `SYSTEM_CONTROL` register, the 2 `MODE_CONTROL` registers, used to set specific modes of the sensor, and lastly the `RED_DATA` register and more specifically the lower byte (`[7-0]`) in it, located at address `0x50`.

To read color data (RGB without the IR value) from the sensor, you need to first set up the sensor mode, by writing to the `MODE_CONTROL1` register. After that, you will need to enable measurements by writing to the `MODE_CONTROL2` register. Lastly, you will need to do the actual reading from the data registers of `RED_DATA`, `GREEN_DATA`, and `BLUE_DATA`. We will do a `burst read` starting from the first byte of the `RED_DATA` register.

> **Note**: You can use the sensor's driver (found here `<install_path>/nrf/drivers/sensor/bh1749>`) to enable other features as well, such as reading `infrared (IR)` light intensity and utilizing interrupts. However, this exercise focuses only on the I2C aspect of interfacing the sensor, hence extra features are not within the scope of this exercise.

### Exercise steps

> **Important**: To run this exercise using a `Thingy:53`, the `nRF Connect SDK` version used must be v2.3 or higher.

1.  In the GitHub repository for this course, open the base code for this exercise, found in `l6/l6_e2` of whichever version directory you are using.

2.  Enable the `I2C` driver by adding the following line to the `prj.conf` file.
    ```kconfig
    CONFIG_I2C=y
    ```
    > **Important**
    > If you are building with `TF-M` (`thingy91/nrf9160/ns`, `thingy53/nrf5340/cpuapp/ns`), you will need to disable logging for TF-M. The `UART` peripheral used for TF-M shares the same base address as the `TWIM` peripheral used in this exercise, and it's enabled by default in `nRF Connect SDK 2.6.0` and above. To disable it, simply add these two `Kconfig` symbols in `prj.conf`.
    > ```kconfig
    > CONFIG_TFM_SECURE_UART=n
    > CONFIG_TFM_LOG_LEVEL_SILENCE=y
    > ```

3.  In `main.c`, include the header file of the `I2C API`.
    ```c
    #include <zephyr/drivers/i2c.h>
    ```
4.  To display the sensor readings on the console, we will use a simple `printk()`.

    4.1 Include the header file `<sys/printk.h>` to use `printk()`.
    ```c
    #include <zephyr/sys/printk.h>
    ```
    4.2 Enable `floating point` format specifiers in `prj.conf` by adding the symbol:
    ```kconfig
    CONFIG_CBPRINTF_FP_SUPPORT=y
    ```
5.  (No action needed) In the previous exercise, we were using an external expansion board. Since the sensor was on that expansion board, and not built-in on a Nordic Semiconductor board, we needed a step to specify that the sensor is connected to an `I2C controller` and provide its address in an `overlay file`.

    In this exercise, the sensor is built-in on the Thingy board and is already specified in the `devicetree file`. You can verify this by checking the devicetree file and searching for the `BH1749` sensor.

6.  Get the `node identifier` of the sensor. This was explained in detail in step 4 of the I2C Driver section.
    ```c
    #define I2C_NODE DT_NODELABEL(bh1749)
    ```
7.  Retrieve the `API-specific device structure`, make sure that the device is ready to use, and print an error message if the I2C device is not ready to use:
    ```c
    static const struct i2c_dt_spec dev_i2c = I2C_DT_SPEC_GET(I2C_NODE);
    if (!device_is_ready(dev_i2c.bus)) {
        printk("I2C bus %s is not ready!\n\r",dev_i2c.bus->name);
        return -1; // Return an error code
    }
    ```
8.  Define the addresses of the relevant registers, which can be found in the sensor datasheet. This information typically goes into a separate header file (`.h`). However, for the sake of keeping this demonstration simple, we will add them in `main.c`.
    ```c
    #define BH1749_SYSTEM_CONTROL                           0x40
    #define BH1749_MODE_CONTROL1                            0x41
    #define BH1749_MODE_CONTROL2                            0x42
    #define BH1749_RED_DATA_LSB                             0x50
    #define BH1749_MODE_CONTROL2_RGB_EN_ENABLE              BIT(4) // Assuming BIT() macro is defined (e.g., #define BIT(n) (1UL << (n)))
    #define BH1749_MODE_CONTROL1_DEFAULTS                   0x2A
    ```
9.  Setup the sensor by writing the value `0x2A` to the `MODE_CONTROL1` register.

    As evident by the MODE_CONTROL1 register map (description from original, map not included here), `0x2A` (`0b00101010` in binary) would mean:
    *   IR Gain: x1,
    *   RGB Gain: x1
    *   Measurement mode: 120ms
    ```c
    char buff1[] = {BH1749_MODE_CONTROL1,BH1749_MODE_CONTROL1_DEFAULTS};
    int ret = i2c_write_dt(&dev_i2c,buff1,sizeof(buff1));
    if(ret != 0){
        // Corrected format specifiers from %c to %x for addresses
        printk("Failed to write to I2C device address 0x%x at Reg. 0x%x\n",dev_i2c.addr,BH1749_MODE_CONTROL1);
    }
    ```
10. To read the RGB values from the sensor we need to enable measurement by writing 1 to `bit 4` of the `MODE_CONTROL2` register. We will use the `i2c_write_dt()` API as shown below.
    ```c
    char buff2[] = {BH1749_MODE_CONTROL2,BH1749_MODE_CONTROL2_RGB_EN_ENABLE};
    ret = i2c_write_dt(&dev_i2c,buff2,sizeof(buff2));
    if(ret != 0){
        // Corrected format specifiers from %c to %x for addresses
        printk("Failed to write to I2C device address 0x%x at Reg. 0x%x\n",dev_i2c.addr,BH1749_MODE_CONTROL2);
    }
    ```
11. Read the RGB values from the `RED_DATA`, `GREEN_DATA`, and `BLUE_DATA` registers.

    Since these registers are sequential, we will do a burst read starting from the first byte of the `RED_DATA` which is at address `0x50` (`BH1749_RED_DATA_LSB`). Notice that we are reading `six bytes` (as the size of `rgb_value` the buffer is 6 bytes) so the register would store the values of RGB as: (most significant bit)BBGGRR(least significant bit)
    ```c
    // Assuming SLEEP_TIME_MS is defined elsewhere (e.g., #define SLEEP_TIME_MS 1000)
    while(1) { // Example loop
        uint8_t rgb_value[6]= {0};
        //Do a burst read of 6 bytes as each color channel is 2 bytes
        ret = i2c_burst_read_dt(&dev_i2c, BH1749_RED_DATA_LSB,rgb_value,sizeof(rgb_value));
        if(ret != 0){
           // Corrected format specifiers from %c to %x for addresses
           printk("Failed to read from I2C device address 0x%x at Reg. 0x%x\n",dev_i2c.addr,BH1749_RED_DATA_LSB);
        } else {
            //Print reading to console
            printk("_______________________________\n");
            printk("Red Value:\t %d\n", (rgb_value[0] | rgb_value[1] << 8));
            printk("Green Value:\t %d\n", (rgb_value[2] | rgb_value[3] << 8));
            printk("Blue Value:\t %d\n", (rgb_value[4] | rgb_value[5] << 8));
        }
        k_msleep(SLEEP_TIME_MS); // Delay in loop
    } // End of example loop
    ```
12. Build the application.

    To build for a `Thingy:91`, use the same building procedure as used in the previous exercises and choose `thingy91/nrf9160/ns` as the target board in the Add Build Configuration window.

    To build for the `Thingy:53`, use `thingy53/nrf5340/cpuapp/ns` as the target board instead.

    > **Note**: In nRF Connect SDK v3.0.0 and above, Hardware Model v2 is used for board targets. Board targets now use `/` as separator (e.g., `thingy91/nrf9160/ns`) instead of the old `_` format (e.g., `thingy91_nrf9160_ns`). If you are migrating from an older SDK version, update your board target names accordingly.

13. Flash the application to your device.

    Refer to the official Nordic documentation for instructions regarding flashing the `Thingy:53` or the `Thingy:91`. You should see an output similar to the one shown in the code block of step 11 (printing RGB values).

    To verify that the color values respond to ambient light changes, you can try for example covering the light sensor on the board (remember the location of the light sensor varies according to the Thingy version you are using, please refer to the board pictures mentioned earlier in the original text) and observe how the values drastically decrease. You can also subject the board to a certain light color and observe how this value in the output increases.

    The solution for this exercise can be found in the GitHub repository, `l6/l6_e2_sol` of whichever version directory you are using.

---
